---
title: SFS 01-05 The First Mandate
keywords: Season_1 Tier_1-4 SFS
summary: "This is a Season 1 Tier 1-4 Scenario set on Absalom Station that uses influence mechanics and has special missions for the Acquisitives faction and the Second Seekers (Luwasi Elsebo) faction."
sidebar: sfs_sidebar
permalink: sfs_0105.html
folder: sfs
scenario: sfs-01-05
---

## Materials Needed

<ul id="profileTabs" class="nav nav-tabs">
    <li class="active"><a class="noCrossRef" href="#maps" data-toggle="tab">Maps</a></li>
    <li><a class="noCrossRef" href="#minis" data-toggle="tab">Minis</a></li>
</ul>
  <div class="tab-content">
<div role="tabpanel" class="tab-pane active" id="maps" markdown="1">
* Map-Pack: Starship Corridors
* Map-Pack: Starship Chambers
* Custom Map (1)
</div>

<div role="tabpanel" class="tab-pane" id="minis" markdown="1">
* Iteration-177
* Naiaj
* Royo
* Ykris & Jhireu
* Zo!
* Electrovore (2)
* Triloteya

</div>

</div>

## Context

x

## GMing Advice

### Timing

As this is dinner party scenario, the biggest issue that you're going to run into is timing. Dinner party encounters will take as much time as you let it, so it's good to go into the slot with an understanding of how long you have. Consider that it's going to take about 30 minutes for the intro and about 30 minutes for the conclusion/paperwork, and that the dinner party is going to take up about 1.5 to 2 times the amount of time that it will take to run the other encounters. If you have a four hour slot, then you're probably looking at spending about 75 minutes on the dinner party and about 50 minutes on each of the other encounters. Adjust as needed for your specific time frame.

(Understanding the timing of your scenario and budgeting time ahead of the slot is always a good idea, but it's really important for this scenario because of the time management issues that dinner party scenarios always present.)

### High Society Gala

#### General Rules

And here we have the dinner party encounter. Much like every other dinner party before it, the rules are slightly different for this encounter. Below is an overview of the rules for this version of the influence rules:
* Each PC can interact with one NPC per social round.
* When that PC's turn comes up, they can either make small talk, attempt to influence that NPC, or aid another PC's efforts this round.
  * **Small Talk** - The PC can attempt a DC 10 Sense Motive check to find out what skills the PCs can use to influence that NPC. A successful check gets one skill plus one more skill for every 5 that they beat the DC by.
  * **Influence** - The PC can attempt a skill check to influence that NPC. They don't need to have identified that the skill will work with Small Talk, but if they pick a skill that's not listed, then it won't work (unless you're feeling really nice). The PC takes a -2 penalty on the check for each time that skill has been used with that NPC this encounter, whether or not those influence attempts were successful or not. The DC is 17 at 1-2 and 20 at 3-4. There is no advantage to beating the DC by 5 or more.
  * **Aid Another** - The PC can attempt to aid either a small talk attempt or an influence attempt, but it must be done with the same skill that the small talk or influence attempt is being done with. The DC for this is 10, much like any other aid another attempt.
* At the end of the round, the PCs get back together, share information, and a new round begins. In this new round, PCs can interact with either the same NPC or a different NPC. This cycle keeps repeating until one of the following two things happens:
  * **4 Rounds Have Passed** *(6 Rounds for a 4 PC Party)* - Luwasi Elsebo calls up the PCs to ask how they are doing. This discussion serves two purposes. The first is that it allows you to use Luwasi to direct PCs to avoid NPCs that they have already influenced and encourage them to work on NPCs that aren't completely influenced. The second is that it's a good time to get PCs to regroup and making sure that they have a strategy for the harder NPCs for their party.
  * **8 Rounds Have Passed** *(12 Rounds for a 4 PC Party)* - The encounter has ended, move on to Rendezvous with Radaszam.

#### Materials

While it's important to have a good grasp of the rules of the encounter, there's a lot of things you need to consider when you actually run the encounter. The first is your physical set-up. Handout 1 is really important, and like most handouts you're going to want more than 1 copy of it. A good rule of thumb is to have 1 copy for every 2 people at the table. This gives each player easy access to the description of the PC, which makes it much easier to recall information when they're trying to juggle 5 different NPCs in their head.

The second thing you'll need is some sort of map-equivalent for the encounter. Obviously, a tactical map is not necessary, but some sort of place where players can place their minis to indicate who their PC is talking to will be a significant quality of life increase. It both makes sure that everyone takes 1 turn in a round, while also serving as a focus for player planning and as a visual aide. This map-equivalent often takes one of two forms:
* **The Actual Map of the Gala** - You have the actual map, so it's not like you need to come up with what the room looks like. When using this method, get a mini for each NPC and place each one at one of the tables on the map. A PC indicates who they are talking to by putting their mini at the table with the NPC. There are a couple of advantages to this set-up. Using an actual map and minis sets the atmosphere really well, the PCs tend to get nervous when you put a map down, actual distances are clearly visible in the case of shenanigans, and it foreshadows the use of the map in the final encounter. There are some slight disadvantages to this set-up. This requires that you have an actual mini for each of the NPCs, and unless you're skilled with altering minis or making custom paper minis, it can be pretty tough to come up with good minis for each NPC. Also if multiple PCs hang around one NPC it can get very crowded, writing down which skills they were successful with can obscure the map too much, and if you're not careful with the video control room, it can spoil that the room might be necessary later.
* **An Abstract Map of the Gala** - For this map, you're going to want a representation of each of the NPCs on the table, big enough so that each PC can place their mini next to it. The best way to do this is going to be to print out each of the pictures from the scenario and then place those out on the table. Even without the pictures, you could pull out a blank flip-mat and write each of the NPCs' names in one section, although if you did that, it would be a good idea to write down a very short description of the NPC on the map so that the players can easily recall the NPC when looking at the map. This has the advantage that it's simple and that you're not afraid to write a bunch of other information on the map to make it easier for the players, but it has the disadvantage of not being a pretty map and making it feel like you're seeing the gala for the first time later on.

The third thing you need is some sort of tracker for the PCs successes and failures. While this can be a thing you write down in 30 seconds like you do the hit points of an encounter, it is worth putting a bit of thought into how you track these successes and failures. The first thing you need to keep in mind is that you have to keep track of which skills the PCs know to use and which ones they have used. Each success with a skill gives a -2 penalty on attempts with that same skill, and if the PCs fail with the same skill 3 times they lose the ability to talk to that NPC. This means that you need to keep track of which skills have worked and which skills have not.

The last thing you should consider is some sort of handout that summarizes the specifics of this encounter's rules. Many veteran PFS/SFS players will recognize the influence rules by now given the number of scenarios that they are in, but the details change every single scenario, so it's worth having a handout with the details of the scenario on it. In general, when running any subsystem, it can be really helpful to have handouts with the rules so that the payers are less likely to ask you a million questions about details you've already given them.

#### Secrecy

One of the big questions whenever you have a subsystem is how much do you tell the players? A good rule of thumb is to tell them everything that they need to make interesting, informed decisions about the encounter without letting them calculate it out from the beginning. You'll need to consider the players that you are running for and the environment you're running in, but below is a good baseline:
* **Tell them everything about the general rules except for the DCs** - Every dinner party scenario has slightly different rules, so being upfront and clear about what the rules are for this scenario will help the players make informed decisions. You don't want to mention the DCs, since then some players will start to math out the encounter. They may figure out the DCs as the encounter goes on since they'll find out when they get successes or not, but often times by the time they've mathed it out, the major roleplaying will be exhausted.
* **Don't tell them how many rounds they will have** - The characters don't know how much time they have since the reason that their talking time ends is that Radaszam calls them away to deal with another situation.
* **Tell them the appearance of each of the NPCs, but nothing else that isn't in the handout** - The appearance section does a good job of giving a non-spoiler summary of each of the NPCs, and that information plus the handout is enough to get started. The rest of the info can come out from roleplaying and Small Talk.
* **Don't tell them how many successes they need, but hint at it with Luwasi** - The entire point with Luwasi is telling them how they're doing, and that lets you do it through roleplaying instead of OOC methods, so lean into that.

#### Roleplaying the NPCs

Of course, the mechanics are great, but what really makes this kind of scene come alive is the roleplaying that it allows. The biggest piece of advice here is to watch your time! You want the roleplaying to give a sense of the conversation and allow for good character development, but you have to keep in mind that there are two whole combat encounters you have to worry about afterwards. That being said, you're going to seem like you're going over time in the first couple rounds because the NPCs will have more to say at the beginning. In the last couple rounds, you'll run through them much quicker.

One of the bigger issues that you have to work around is the fact that the PCs aren't given a goal except to get the NPCs to like them. This means that if you want some roleplaying to happen, you need to provide a clear, strong hook, especially if the PC is partaking in Small Talk. Below are some ideas of what to do with each NPC:
* **Iteration-177** - Lead with something like "Hello. I'm Iteration-177, and I work for the Aspis Consortium." In most cases, this will do one of two things. Either the PC will start asking about the Aspis Consortium, or they will respond with their organization, which Iteration-177 can immediately start asking about. From there, it's not too hard to have Iteration-177 ask about magic or religion as it comes up in discussion.
* **Naiaj** - Whenever a PC comes up to talk to Naiaj for the first time, hold up one finger as if asking them to be quiet for a moment. Stare at your wrist for a couple seconds, then complain about some other mission that's going on at the time. (Focus on the shipment from the drow on Apostae, but feel free to intersperse other stuff in there for flavor.) Once she's done reading it, then she interacts with the PCs. Stop when it gets annoying, but you want it there to reinforce the idea that she's more focused on the Starfinder Society missions than this gala.
* **Royo** - When describing Royo, make it sound like he's an old professor that you might see in a college nowadays that has been plopped into the middle of this sci-fi scene. When he introduces himself to people, he asks the PCs immediately what they're interested in as opposed to who they are or what they do. If the thing that they are interested in doesn't sound exciting, then he doesn't even bother to ask them their name.
* **Ykris and Jhireu** - The parasite is already a pretty big hook for players, as even in the Starfinder universe this is unusual. If you get a chance before the scenario, you can ask the PC about any visible augmentations that they have and Ykris can comment on them with his opinion about the manufacturer. (Obviously CeriCorp's stuff is the best.) Make sure that the PCs don't feel like jerks for asking questions about the parasite/host relationship, but make sure they feel like jerks if they don't refer to Ykris in the first person.
* **Zo!** - In terms of roleplaying hooks, this is probably the NPC with the easiest hook. Be energetic, animated, and exaggerated. Once the PCs say that they're Starfinders, he immediately starts going into interview mode, instinctively holding a microphone out once he asks the players a question. Encourage the players to improvise the most hilarious stunts that they can do in the gala. Have fun being ridiculous.

### B. The Countdown

## Connections to Other scenarios

{% include spoiler.html id="One" name="01-06 A Night in Nightarch" content="The reports that Naiaj is reading ahead during this scenario are a preview for the plot of this scenario." %}

{% include spoiler.html id="Two" name="01-09 Live Exploration Extreme!" content="Zo! is looking for people who would be good for the next expedition to Salvation's End, which takes lace in this scenario." %}

## Known Issues

* x

{% include links.html %}
