---
title: SFS 01-01 The Commencement
keywords: Season_1 Tier_1-2 SFS
summary: "This is a Season 4 Tier 5-9 Scenario set in Magnimar that involves investigation and tough combat."
sidebar: sfs_sidebar
permalink: sfs_0101.html
folder: sfs
scenario: sfs-01-01
---

## Materials Needed

<ul id="profileTabs" class="nav nav-tabs">
    <li class="active"><a class="noCrossRef" href="#maps" data-toggle="tab">Maps</a></li>
    <li><a class="noCrossRef" href="#minislow" data-toggle="tab">Low Tier Minis</a></li>
    <li><a class="noCrossRef" href="#minishigh" data-toggle="tab">High Tier Minis</a></li>
    <li><a class="noCrossRef" href="#minisboth" data-toggle="tab">Both Tiers Minis</a></li>
</ul>
  <div class="tab-content">
<div role="tabpanel" class="tab-pane active" id="maps" markdown="1">
* Map-Pack: Town
* Map-Pack: Lairs
* Map-Pack: Haunted Mansions
* Custom Map (2)
</div>

<div role="tabpanel" class="tab-pane" id="minislow" markdown="1">
* Angelic Guardians (3)
* Crysalis Black
* Wood Golem
* Chairs (3)
* Jaelle
* Aspis Thugs (2)
* Black Sisters (4)

</div>

<div role="tabpanel" class="tab-pane" id="minishigh" markdown="1">
* Angelic Guardians (4)
* Crysalis Black
* Wood Golem
* Chairs (3)
* Earthmaw
* Jaelle
* Aspis Thugs (4)
* Black Sisters (6)
* Flesh Golem

</div>

<div role="tabpanel" class="tab-pane" id="minisboth" markdown="1">
* Angelic Guardians (4)
* Crysalis Black
* Wood Golem
* Chairs (3)
* Earthmaw
* Jaelle
* Aspis Thugs (4)
* Black Sisters (6)
* Flesh Golem

</div>
</div>

## Context

This scenario was one of the Gencon 2012 scenarios, released to start Season 4. Starting with Season 4, PFS Scenarios were written assuming a 6-person party instead of 4 and included instructions for scaling the encounter down for only having four PCs. In the beginning, they overdid the power level when adjusting for 6 and the 4 player scaling didn't always work, which led to many of the early Season 4 scenarios being a little higher power than anyone expected. They're still playable scenarios, but players may need to be warned to bring their A-Game.

## GMing Advice

This scenario is all about setting the mood. This scenario has the ability to start off as fairly innocent and get quickly out of hand. The real challenge of this scenario is to balance roleplaying and building a creepy atmosphere, and making sure that you leave enough time for the final encounter to really shine.

### Getting Started

Maybe the biggest problem with this scenario is the fact that it is called "The Golemworks Incident". It does kind of give away the fact that the golems are going to be a problem. In addition, the opening box text doesn't really sell the idea of "Oh, I have another really important mission for you, but this would be a really big favor right now." Now, no matter what you do, there will be savvy players who won't be fooled by any tricks you do in the opening, but you can do a better job of setting the mood.

First, set the scene by reminding everyone where in time the scenario is. This is right at the beginning of Season 4, and as part of the Pathfinder Society's new focus on Varisia, they are setting up Heidmarch Manor as a Pathfinder Lodge in Magnimar. Your goal with this explanation is to emphasize the fact that the Pathfinders are currently setting up Heidmarch Manor.

Now let's embellish the box text. This misdirection comes from Drogon's post on the [GM Discussion Thread for 4-03](http://paizo.com/threads/rzs2oo29?403-Golemworks-Incident#28).

> I avoided this by opening with a harried Sheila Heidmarch welcoming everyone to Maginimar. She is excited that some of the promised Pathfinders have actually arrived, rather than gone missing as others have. Moreover, they're veterans and "will be able to get out to a more dangerous part of the Irespan to find one group that hasn't checked in for over a week. They were after some materials for the Golemworks, and were due back days ago." At certain points, I had her get interrupted by by various things, and ended with a delivery from the Golemworks showing up at the same time a steward tells her that "the errand boy who was sent to Mayor Grobaras still hasn't come back, and I need to know what to do with that requisition order."
>
> She sighs, looks at the group, the delivery, and the steward, and says, "Look. Normally I wouldn't ask you to do this, but can you get these crates into the greenhouse and get them unpacked? In fact, you are certainly more tactically minded than I am; why don't you place them on the grounds? By the time you're done, I'll have done what I need to do, have everything together for the mission, and we can get any last minute questions out of the way. Would that be too much trouble?"

Also at the beginning when the PCs are describing their characters, try to note down one major characteristic for each PC. You'll need it later for Black's office.

### Terror in the Greenhouse

When this encounter is over, the players should be aware that this was a murder attempt. Try to make it as obvious as possible just with the Guardians' tactics. Aim breath weapons at the target even if it gets nobody else. Provoke attacks of opportunity from other PCs to get at the target. Still follow tactics, so if a PC attacks the Guardian be sure to attack them back, but focus as much as you can.

### B1. Crysalis Black's Office

This is when the creep factor starts to get turned up. Give them enough time to investigate the office, then Black should show up. When you play Black, subtly look at the characteristics you noted earlier to slip them into conversation. If you don't have to ask what PCs look like it makes the conversation feel that much more natural. Your goal here should be to push the PCs to try to attack Crysalis before he attacks them.

Be very careful with this conversation. This is the point in the scenario where the creepiness is directed at the characters, which means that the players may easily feel it as well. Playing up Black looking at the PCs as a collection of parts for his golems can be really fun, but that doesn't mean that you should feel free to make players feel so uncomfortable that they don't want to play anymore. The better you can strike that balance here, the better this encounter will be.

Another thing to keep in mind with this encounter is that the real Black is scrying on the PCs as soon as his simulacrum enters the room. This creates an invisible scrying sensor that can be noticed with a DC 25 Perception check. At the end of the day, this probably won't change much as they know that Black has to be a decently high level caster in order to craft golems, but it's a nice detail if you can remember it.

### C. The Doll House

You're going to creep people out just from the descriptions, so just run the dungeon crawl in the house and you'll be fine.

There is a really annoying wall in the house. The wall between C2 and C3 is in the middle of the square, which means that half of the square is in each room, and that means that you get the frustrating "can I stand in this half a square" questions all the time. A recommended solution is to say that you can stand in the square, but no one can walk through an ally's space in that square. The encounter is already pretty cramped, nevermind taking away around a third of the squares on the map.

### D1. Mother's Hall

This is the optional encounter, and you probably will not run it. This scenario is pretty strapped for time as it is, and fighting the combat doesn't add that much, especially since the soulbound dolls have *rage*, which does not exactly turn them into fearsome combatants.

Just because you're skipping it doesn't mean you still shouldn't describe the room though! The room is wonderfully creepy, especially when you describe the dolls as looking like the girls in the portrait.

### D2. The Doll Door

Drogon posted some wonderful insults on the [GM Discussion Thread](http://paizo.com/threads/rzs2oo29?403-Golemworks-Incident#28) for the door to use when it yells at the PCs. You only need to use a couple to get your point across, but they do a wonderful job of turning an already creepy scene even creepier.

<div class="panel-group" id="accordion">
                    <div class="panel panel-default">
                        <div class="panel-heading">
                            <div class="panel-title">
                                <a class="noCrossRef accordion-toggle" data-toggle="collapse" data-parent="#accordion" href="#collapseOne">Drogon's Insults</a>
                            </div>
                        </div>
                        <div id="collapseOne" class="panel-collapse collapse noCrossRef">
                            <div class="panel-body">
                            <p>"What's the matter, child? Why should I open the door? You can't hold it a little longer? HAVE to go to the bathroom right now? Fool child. Stand there and don't move. And so help me, if you pee your pants you won't be let out for another day!"</p>

                            <p>"Why can't you be as darling as your lovely sisters? At least they love me. You? You're just filth that walks around and doesn't care for anything I do for you."</p>

                            <p>"What is that smell? By Asmodeus's beard, child! Can't you at least find a chamber pot before dropping a load like that?"</p>

                            <p>"Put that down! Why do you even try to impress me, fool boy? It's as though you think I'll suddenly decide you're one of your sisters, and that you're deserving of love."</p>
                            </div>
                        </div>
                    </div>
  </div>

### D3. Black's Laboratory

This is the famous encounter that tends to TPK parties. It turns out that an APL + 4 wizard with good control spells and a bunch of terrain that makes it harder to close with him is a difficult encounter. There are a couple things to keep in mind for this encounter.

**Don't start Black in a place where he can be seen from the door.** While he's not optimized for combat, he is trying to kill the PCs, and starting in a place where he is visible from the door being opened is just a bad idea. He'll have to step into visibility in order to *black tentacles* the party, but there's no reason to let him fail a save against some nasty control spell before he gets to act.

**The terrain is a big part of this encounter.** There are three things to keep track of.
* The entire floor is difficult terrain because it is covered in doll parts.
* The two giant syringes fire on people who haven't moved since their last turn. (Init 10)
* Bolts come flying out of the metal coffin in the middle for 10 rounds. (Init 0, this is removed for the four-player adjustment)

The terrain is useful for a couple reasons. First, it provides interference for Black. PCs may need to spend actions dealing with the terrain, whether that's attacking objects or casting *feather step* or *fly*, and the floor and the syringes make it harder for melee to close with Black. Second, the terrain really adds to the flavor of the scenario. Emphasize that the reason that the floor is difficult terrain is because it is covered in doll parts. The metal coffin with the creation waking up is just super creepy, and the suspense as something breaks out of it does a really good job of adding urgency to the encounter.

Oftentimes with PFS it's easy to forget about the terrain as people stand still and full-attack, but don't let that happen with this encounter.

**The four-player adjustment doesn't really do anything.** Sickening Black doesn't have much of an effect on his combat capability. The only rolls that Black will be making most of the time will be initiative and saves. The only spell that he has that is affected by the sickened condition is *scorching ray*. The sickened condition doesn't apply to the *black tentacles* because he isn't making the attack roll for the tentacles, the spell is. This means that his offensive capabilities aren't really affected at all, and defensively he still has the difficult terrain, the syringes, and the same AC and defensive buffs that he did before. The sickened condition doesn't really do anything.

This means that if you are running the four-player adjustment as a GM, you may want to decide how much you want to hold back. You have a lot of freedom with the tactics in this encounter, which means that you have the ability to plink with lower level spells like *magic missile* or *scorching ray* rather than throw out *lightning bolts* or *chain lightnings* right away. You've had three other combats with this party so far, so you should have some idea of how capable they are. You do need to start with *black tentacles* though.

**_Black tentacles_ sometimes just ends the encounter immediately.** At the low tier, 5th level is the earliest that anyone can expect to encounter *black tentacles*, so there may definitely be people who are not prepared for it. Spells like *liberating command*, *grease*, and *freedom of movement* are helpful, but only if the characters think to have them in the first place. Remember to reroll the attack every round (at +15 or +18), and don't forget that if the *tentacles* have something grappled, they get a +5 bonus on checks to maintain the grapple.

## Known Issues

* The adamantine crowbar Trust Buddy is on the chronicle sheet. On the sheet, it says that Trusty Buddy "bypasses DR when used as a weapon". Given the context, clearly that is meant to be "bypasses DR/adamantine when used as a weapon", not "bypasses all DR when used as a weapon". That sentence is there to stop the interpretation of "it's an improvised weapon, therefore the material it's made out of doesn't matter."

{% include links.html %}
