---
title: PFS 5-24 Assault on the Wound
keywords: Season_5 Tier_3-7
summary: "This is a Season 5 Tier 3-7 Scenario that is set in The Worldwound and involves mass combat and troops."
sidebar: pfs1_sidebar
permalink: pfs1_0524.html
folder: pfs1
scenario: pfs1-05-24
---

## Materials Needed

<ul id="profileTabs" class="nav nav-tabs">
    <li class="active"><a class="noCrossRef" href="#maps" data-toggle="tab">Maps</a></li>
    <li><a class="noCrossRef" href="#minislow" data-toggle="tab">Low Tier Minis</a></li>
    <li><a class="noCrossRef" href="#minishigh" data-toggle="tab">High Tier Minis</a></li>
    <li><a class="noCrossRef" href="#minisboth" data-toggle="tab">Both Tiers Minis</a></li>
</ul>
  <div class="tab-content">
<div role="tabpanel" class="tab-pane active" id="maps" markdown="1">
* Custom Hex Map
* Custom Map
</div>

<div role="tabpanel" class="tab-pane" id="minislow" markdown="1">
* Cultists (10)
* Tiefling
* Dretch (4)
* Howler Cavalry
* Rift Drake
* Schir (5)
* Stitched Horror
* Tiefling Troop
* Warlord Brae-Hagen


</div>

<div role="tabpanel" class="tab-pane" id="minishigh" markdown="1">
* Cultists (10)
* Tiefling
* Dretch (4)
* Howler Cavalry
* Rift Drake
* Schir (5)
* Stitched Horror
* Tiefling Troop (2)
* Warlord Brae-Hagen

</div>

<div role="tabpanel" class="tab-pane" id="minisboth" markdown="1">
* Cultists (10)
* Tiefling
* Dretch (4)
* Howler Cavalry
* Rift Drake
* Schir (5)
* Stitched Horror
* Tiefling Troop (2)
* Warlord Brae-Hagen

</div>
</div>

## Context

This scenario was in the last batch of scenarios released for Season 5. It takes place at the same time as #5-25 Vengeance at Sundered Crag. This is also the explanation why characters in the 3-7 range are the ones leading armies - it's because the higher level characters are chasing down Tancred Desimire and Thurl. Throughout the season, the players have been earned "Accumulating an Army" boons that allowed them to have access to unique armies during this season. The scenario cares about whether the players have earned the boons instead of the character because all of the scenarios where you can get an army are a higher tier than this one.

## GMing Advice

### Mass Combat

How well this scenario goes is highly correlated to how prepared you are for mass combat. Out of all the subsystems that have ever been introduced in a PFS scenario, this is the most complicated. With the massive amount of handouts and new rules to learn, it's easy for a player to get lost in the mass combat portion. Since the mass combat is both half of the content of the scenario and half of the playtime of the scenario, if a player gets lost during this portion, then it's going to be a bad scenario.

This is, of course, not to say that if you are perfectly prepared then the scenario is guaranteed to go well. Some people will not enjoy mass combat and therefore not enjoy the initial half of the scenario. Some people will not get the rules even if you're prepared as much as possible and have the clearest explanations. But the more prepared you are, the better chances you have of the scenario going well.

In addition, one thing to keep in mind is how you're presenting yourself during the mass combat section of the scenario. Mass combat is already a bit of a hard sell since it's basically a completely different game than Pathfinder and because it basically doesn't use the character's stats at all. Players come to PFS to play Pathfinder their characters, so being told that you're playing a different your game with some pregenerated characters can be a hard sell. If you look confident, excited, and prepared, that will do a lot to help ease the fears of the players who are nervous about playing this new system.

#### Preparation

First, print out a copy of each of the four Player Handouts each player. Because mass combat involves a bunch of new rules that players are not familiar with - it is much better to have a copy of the rules for each player so that they can look up whatever they need when they need it.

Next, print out the army stat blocks found [here](http://pfsprep.com/e107_plugins/forum/forum_viewtopic.php?339). What's better about these as opposed to the ones found in the scenario is that all the special abilities relevant to that army are available on the army's stat block, which helps reduce cross-referencing between the stat block and the handout. In addition, because they take up full sheets of paper, it's much harder to lose them. Make sure to print out the Worldwound armies for yourself as well - even though you've hopefully looked through the armies ahead of time, it's still helpful to have all the information for one army written on the sheet.

For yourself, you will want some way of summarizing the status of all the armies under your control. The four major things you need to keep track of are the army's current hit points, strategy, tactics, and initiative. In addition, having a cheat sheet for all of the stats of the armies can really help.

{% include plug.html content="One such cheat sheet is available in both subtiers of my [PFS Prep](http://pfsprep.com/e107_plugins/forum/forum_viewtopic.php?2793) for this scenario." %}

You'll also need a hex map. If you have a Chessex mat, then you're in luck, since the other side of that mat is in hexes, and even the smaller mats should still be big enough to hold the map. Paizo does sell hex grid flip mats, but unfortunately since they're used for space combat, they're pretty much impossible to draw on, so they're not really useful here. The cheapest solution if you don't already have a hex mat is probably going to be [Gaming Paper](http://paizo.com/products/btpy8x0f?Gaming-Paper-1-Hexes-Roll).

The one thing you won't need for this encounter is your normal initiative tracker. Because initiative changes every round, it's not really worth it to order it every round. Just start at 16 and start counting down, and when someone's number is called out, they take their turn. (Now of course, you'll need your initiative tracker for tactical combat later, but there's really no need to pull it out for this encounter.)

#### Explanation of Mass Combat

At the beginning of each round, everyone rolls initiative. An army's initiative is 1d10 + the army's speed + the commander's Charisma modifier. On your turn, you move a number of hexes equal to your army's speed. You can be in the same hex as another army. If it's a friendly army, nothing special happens. If it's an enemy army, you and that army are now locked in battle, and after everyone moves you will fight it out. If there is an enemy army in your space from earlier in the round, then you can't move because you are locked in battle. If there are no groups locked in battle, then the round ends and you roll initiative for the next round. If there are groups locked in battle, then you resolve each of those battles. There can be more than two armies locked in battle, and you can move into a space where two armies are already locked in battle to join that fight. You can choose not to move at the start of a Movement Phase and rest instead. If you don't get into a fight, then you heal a number of hit points equal to your ACR.

At the start of a battle, each army chooses an initial tactic. For many armies, there will be one tactic that you want to stick with for most of the time.

Once everyone has chosen their initial tactic, a Ranged phase occurs. One round of fighting happens, but the only people who can make attacks are those with the ranged weapons ability. (This is found in the Resources section of the army's stat block.) Then a Melee phase occurs, where one round of fighting happens, but in this one everyone can participate. From then on, we repeat the Melee phase over and over again until either one side retreats or one side is defeated.

Each round of combat (either melee or ranged) follows these steps:
1. **Choose a Strategy** - Your army's strategy modifies its OM (offense modifier) and DV (defense value). If this is your first Melee phase, then you can choose any of the five. In later Melee phases, then you can shift up or down one step for free, or more than one step with a DC 20 Morale check. (Note that your Morale bonus is equal to the army's morale bonus plus your Charisma modifier + 1 if you have 5 ranks in Profession (soldier).) In Ranged phases you do not have a strategy.
2. **Change your Tactic** - If you want to switch what tactic your army is using, you can do that with a DC 15 Morale check. It's free to keep using the same tactic that you were using before.
3. **Determine Who You're Attacking** - All of the armies are considered to be attacking each other at the same time, so each army should determine who they're attacking without knowledge of the other armies' targets. In practice, this means that the PCs talk to each other and figure out who they're attacking, then the DM reveals who the bad guys are attacking. Note that multiple armies can gang up on one other army.
4. **Roll Offense Checks** - Each army rolls 1d20 and adds its OM and compares it to the DV of the defending army. If the roll beats the DV of the defending army, then the defending army takes damage equal to the difference between the roll and their DV. Note that this is different than in tactical combat because there is not a separate attack and damage roll - the same roll is used for attack and damage. All damage is applied at the same time, which means that two armies can destroy each other at the same time, and even if an army is defeated it still gets to do its damage.
5. **Check for Rout** - If an army's hit points are less than or equal to the army's ACR, then the army may be routed. The commander of the army needs to make a DC 15 Morale check. If they fail, then the army scatters and retreats. The other armies get one last opportunity at making an Offense check to kill them as they retreat.

Once every battle is resolved, the round ends and everyone rolls initiative again.

The statblocks for the armies contain their Consumption for completion, but Consumption isn't used in this scenario.

#### Running Mass Combat

Once you're prepared to run Mass Combat, it's not that hard to run. The major issue that you're going to run into is downtime. The issue is that each player controls 1 army, and on most turns that army just moves. Battles will happen, but they will rarely involve more than 2 of the players (especially since the Taldan Army of Exploration gains benefts for not having any allies in the fight), which means the other 2-4 players aren't doing anything. It's an unfortunate side-effect of the mass combat system. Encouraging players to take their turns quickly, and also being very descriptive with what's happening will do a lot more to help keep the interest of players who don't have the spotlight on them.

#### Engagement 1

This supposed to be the warmup battle. The only real difficulty your players will have with this encounter is the rules of mass combat. Make sure as you're running it that you're highlighting the different steps or helping players recognize when they can use certain abilities. Your strategy won't be that difficult, but make sure that you pair up at least one pair of cultists into the same battle so that you can talk about an encounter with multiple enemies (and hopefully hint to the players that this is a good strategy.)

#### Engagement 2

This the real battle. There are three fronts that this battle will be fought on. The first is protecting Silvershore from the dretch & schir armies, the second is dealing with the cultist army's ritual, and the third is engaging with the howler cavalry. The players should be paying attention to all three, and make sure you make a really big deal of the cultists and howler cavalry showing up at the beginning of Day 2.

The dretches are more dangerous than they look. Relentless brutality is just as rough as it sounds, and the +8 OM/-8 DV from both relentless brutality and having a reckless strategy means that the dretches wont last long, but they are likely to put some hurt on the PCs before they go. Which is good, because there are 8+ armies in this engagement on the GM's side, which means that each round has the potential to be really long if you're not keeping pace well.

{% include warning.html content="While the map for this isn't *that* important, the placement of the cultist army is. The placement of the cultist army is such that if you start in Silvershore and have a speed of 2, you can make it to the cultist army and have 1 battle phase to defeat them before the ritual goes off. If your map doesn't look exactly like the one from the scenario, make sure that your cultist placement is as precise." %}

### A1. Cliff Top

Just in case one new subsystem wasn't enough for the players, this also has troops! When this came out, troops had been introduced a year before in the Reign of Winter Adventure Path, but hadn't been anywhere else, which means that this was a shock for most players. Since then, troops were printed in Bestiary 6, which means that they're a little bit more common knowledge. However, they're not exactly common in PFS, so for plenty of players, this will be their first time experiencing troops.

When running troops, the easiest way to think about them is that they are basically swarms with a couple changes.
1. **They can be harmed by any weapons.** - Unlike Tiny swarms which take half damage from slashing/piercing or Fine/Diminutive swarms which can't be harmed by weapons, troops can be hit with weapons normally.  
2. **They take up a bigger space and can reach.** - A swarm usually takes up 4 squares. A troop takes up 16 squares, and since they are shapeable, this can provide great flexibility. In addition, since this troop is made of Medium creatures, they can reach adjacent to their spaces, so they will also do troop damage to creatures adjacent to them.
3. **They can take attacks of opportunity.** - Swarms explicitly say that they don't threaten with their swarm attacks, but troops explicitly say that they do. They autohit with their attacks of opportunity, but they are subject to the same restrictions on AoOs as other creatures. (1/round unless you have Combat Reflexes)
4. **They have more shenanigans.** - Most swarms double move, do their swarm attack, and they're done. The tiefling troop has a standard action in crossbow volley and a move action in burning wave. Do note that the troop attack happens at the end of a move, which means that the troop has three options every turn and gets to do two of them.

What is also important to keep in mind is what a troop carries over from swarms. Most importantly, they carry over the swarm's vulnerability to area of effect damage, their immunity to single-target spells, and their ability to make spellcasting harder in their area. This usually means that a well placed *fireball* or *lightning bolt* takes out a large percentage of their hit points, and the fight ends pretty quickly. Even without AoEs, this fight won't take that long. The tiefling troops have scary damage output, but they don't really have good AC or hit points, so they die pretty quickly.

When the PCs first encounter the troops, you should give them some basics about troops for free, much like it's obvious how some parts of a swarm work. Emphasize that weapons will work against these creatures, they are vulnerable to area of effects, and that they are immune to single-target spells. The rest they can figure out with a successful Knowledge (planes) check.

### A2. Troop Residence

The trap here is fairly straightforward, but the curse is not. Identifying that someone is under the curse is pretty straightforward - that's written into the text, but figuring out what the curse is actually supposed to do is another question. Keep in mind that this curse is trivial if spotted before a fight, but deadly if not spotted before the fight. Recommendations for identifying the curse would either be to give it on the Heal check or require a DC 25 Knowledge (arcana) check if someone finds the rune with *detect magic*.

### A4. The Mouth of Evil

Compared to everything else in this scenario, this encounter is simple. At low tier, Brae-Hagen is a relatively normal magus. Pool strike isn't a normal choice, but it's just another touch attack. The half-fiend template doesn't do that much to boost Brae-Hagen at low levels. The major things to keep in mind are the surprise *unholy blight* (which can't be used with spell combat) and the smite good - which is as strong as a paladin's smite evil, not watered down like a fiendish creature's smite good.

At high tier, Brae-Hagen gets significantly tougher. The combination of *mirror image*, *displacement*, and *stinking cloud* can lead to a long encounter. One important thing to keep in mind is that the buffs have not been applied to Brae-Hagen's statistics - in particular, *bull's strength* isn't factored in to his statistics despite the large Strength score. Smite good is also way more rough at this tier, but keep in mind that Brae-Hagen doesn't have any way of knowing which members of the party are good or not ahead of time, so be careful that you're not metagaming!

{% include important.html content="While a creature with *mirror image* and *displacement* up is fairly hard to hit, they don't work as well together as you might think. Say an enemy hits the creature's AC, gets through the *mirror image*, but misses due to the *displacement*. Now the enemy has missed the creature's AC by 5 or less (technically by zero or a negative number), and this pops an image. This means that one or two of the images are likely to pop without preventing any hits. Still a strong combination, but not as strong as it might seem at first glance." %}

Probably the most important part of this encounter is to describe the opening of the mouth and the crowd fighting down below. This will give Silver Crusade members the clue they need on how to accomplish their mission, while also greatly affecting the terrain of the battle. 

## Known Issues

* At both tiers, the Tiefling Troop has an attack bonus listed. Troops don't actually roll to hit though - they automatically damage anything they reach like a swarm. Just ignore the attack bonus.
* The mass combat rules in the back contain the rules for commanders, but they aren't referenced anywhere else. Just ignore them.
* The troop subtype stats in the back contain the line "A troop's stat block has 'troop' in its Melee entry with an attack bonus given only for attacks of opportunity." This line is no longer present in the troop rules from Bestiary 6.

{% include links.html %}
