---
title: PFS 5-13 Weapon in the Rift
keywords: Season_5 Tier_5-9
summary: "This is a Season 5 Tier 5-9 Scenario with a hard mode that is set in The Worldwound and involves dungeon crawling and puzzles."
sidebar: pfs1_sidebar
permalink: pfs1_0513.html
folder: pfs1
scenario: pfs1-05-13
---

## Materials Needed

<ul id="profileTabs" class="nav nav-tabs">
    <li class="active"><a class="noCrossRef" href="#maps" data-toggle="tab">Maps</a></li>
    <li><a class="noCrossRef" href="#minislow" data-toggle="tab">Low Tier Minis</a></li>
    <li><a class="noCrossRef" href="#minishigh" data-toggle="tab">High Tier Minis</a></li>
    <li><a class="noCrossRef" href="#minisboth" data-toggle="tab">Both Tiers Minis</a></li>
</ul>
  <div class="tab-content">
<div role="tabpanel" class="tab-pane active" id="maps" markdown="1">
* Custom Map
</div>

<div role="tabpanel" class="tab-pane" id="minislow" markdown="1">
* Hound Archons (3)
* Ghalcor
* Second Allip
* Abrikandilu Demon (2)
* Shemhazian Demon
* Ollysta Zadrian
* Silver Crusader (2)


</div>

<div role="tabpanel" class="tab-pane" id="minishigh" markdown="1">
* Hound Archons (3)
* Ghalcor
* Second Allip
* Abrikandilu Demon (2)
* Shemhazian Demon
* Ollysta Zadrian
* Silver Crusader (2)

</div>

<div role="tabpanel" class="tab-pane" id="minisboth" markdown="1">
* Hound Archons (3)
* Ghalcor
* Second Allip
* Abrikandilu Demon (2)
* Shemhazian Demon
* Ollysta Zadrian
* Silver Crusader (2)

</div>
</div>

## Context

This scenario was released in the middle of Season 5. Season 5, in addition to being a season attached to an adventure path, also introduced the idea of faction-specific scenarios. This season was the first time that they got rid of the individual faction handouts in each scenario and instead made the PCs figure out what the mission is based off the faction's goals. This scenario tends to be much easier to figure out than others that have come out in the same season.

## GMing Advice

### A2. The Acts of Iomedae

The main thing to remember is that this is a puzzle directed to the players moreso than the characters. There is a little bit of skill checks involved in the beginning, but otherwise most of the interaction in this puzzle comes from the players themselves. Remember that you are there to help the players, and the main benefit about putting a puzzle in a RPG session is that there is a Game Master who is there to help the players figure out the answer. Be liberal with your hints, but still make sure that the players are figuring things out.

[Here is a picture of what the door looks like](http://pfsprep.com/e107_plugins/forum/forum_viewtopic.php?250). Whether or not you use this picture, you should have some sort of visual aid to help the players understand what's going on with the door. Understanding exactly what's going on with the door tends to be a sticking point for a lot of players, and a visual aid can easily cut through the misunderstandings.

In order to solve the puzzle, there are three "Ahas" that the PCs need to make. They need to (1) realize that the puzzles refers to the Acts of Iomedae, (2) assign the correct Acts to the correct statements, and (3) figure out how to input the Act numbers into the door correctly.

For (1), this Aha needs to come fairly quickly. Frequently, the players will ask if these sound like anything they've heard before which is a wonderful time to ask for the Knowledge(history/religion) check. If they spend too long on this step, feel free to call for this check yourself. If a character worships Iomedae, they should get a bonus to remember these, and if a character has a holy text of Iomedae on them, then they should get all 12 for free. In general, try to be nice to the players for this step - this is the gateway to the fun part of the puzzle.

For (2), the players need to identify where the reference to each act is in the four inscriptions. While they do that, they need to recognize that each Act is used exactly once and that there are not necessarily the same number of acts in each line. There is not a specific clue to point to these last two things, but they are reasonable inferences to make. If it looks like the PCs are floundering, these are good pointers to give them.

Below is a list of where each Act is referenced in the four inscriptions. Most of these are fairly straightforward, but \#1 and \#4 tend to be the hardest because they are the least straightforward references.  
* A **broken sword**(\#6) is reborn in **knight-saving blood**(\#9) so that **Absalom**(\#7) might withstand evil.
* **Inspired by her courage**(\#4) by fight of the righteous, the **Black Prince was judged in the Halls of Aroden**(\#8).
* By **escaping the wound**(\#1), her royal servants helped her slay the **King of the Barrowood**(\#3), **ascending her to godhood**(\#11).
* Because of **The Battle of Three Sorrows**(\#5), the cities of **Eleder**(\#2) and **Kantaria**(\#10) prospered with freedom and wealth.

For (3), the players need to figure out how to input the numbers into the dials. The main trick here is that the two-digit numbers are inputted with two dials rather than one act per dial. There is one red herring, in that there are 11 spaces on the dials, so the PCs might be tempted to assign 1 through 9 to Acts \#1 through \#9, then have 0 be Act \#10 and the blank space be Act \#11. The problem with this solution is that none of the inscriptions have four acts in them, so there's extra dials that don't have any assigned value. Feel free to point this out to them if they seem to be stuck on this point.

Of course, tearing down the door is still a thing. The door has hardness 10, hp 60, Strength DC 30, which a decent martial in this tier will take down in a couple rounds. There is very little consequences for this, besides the fact that the hound archons in the next room will hear them, and if they don't realize that they can take the prism out, then they might drain the prism unnecessarily. There's also a little bit of damage associated with the trap, but it's entirely avoidable after the first attack unless no one in the party is good and they don't think to remove the prism. Encourage them to solve the puzzle, but if they are frustrated or really don't want to solve it, let them bash.

{% include note.html content="This is the first time in the scenario that the PCs have access to a sacred prism. You want to make sure you set up some easy way to keep track of who has which sacred prisms and how many charges that they have. If you're playing around a physical table, perhaps make an index card for each prism and keep track of the charges on the card and show who is holding the prism by who is holding the card. If you have a system for this at the start, this will make your life easier when it comes to the end encounter if you've established all session where the prisms are." %}

### A7. The Staging Room

At the low tier, this fight isn't too hard. Allips are really frustrating to fight, but on their own they're not actually not that hard due to the fact that their only attack is negated entirely by a Will save. At the high tier, on the other hand, this fight becomes much rougher because the 10 levels of oracle add quite the offensive punch. Here are some things to keep in mind while running the high tier of this encounter.

**PCs only become immune to the babble if they succeed at their save.** Unless the PCs have used something like *silence* to stop the babble, characters who fail at their save do not become immune for 24 hours. This means that if Ghalcor would do something to break their fascinate, they immediately have to save again because of the babble. This means that actions that would normally break a fascinate instead give affected people a new save against it. (This is true for all allips, not just Ghalcor, but it's worth pointing out because GMs tend to miss this subtlety.)

**Between *borrow fortune* and Relentless Compulsion, Ghalcor has infinite rerolls.** Ghalcor has 10 4th and 5th level spells. While there is a higher chance that this fight can go longer than 10 rounds than most combats, 4th and 5th level spells are still going to take up most of Ghalcor's standard actions. This means that his 3rd level spells are mostly free to spend on immediate action rerolls (with the occasional *bestow curse* thrown in there). Just remember that if he uses an immediate action to *borrow fortune*, he can't then use a swift action to activate planar haze.

***Mass Inflict Light Wounds*** **can do double duty.** The *inflict X wounds* spells don't work like channel energy when it comes to determining if they hurt living creatures or heal undead. If it targets a living creature, it harms them while if it targets a undead creature, it heals them. That means that the *mass inflict X wounds* can do different things to different creatures with the same spell. This is a great late combat spell when the *confusion* has mostly worn off and most of the characters are immune to the babble.

***Confusion*** **is a thing.** This spell should be Ghalcor's opening turn. There is nothing else nearly as strong on his list and the combination of *confusion* plus babble makes for a unique encounter. This is where the difficulty in this encounter comes from.

***Grace*** **is a thing.** Much like Ghalcor's 3rd level spells are mostly for *borrow fortune*, his 2nd level spells are going to mostly be for *grace*. Ghalcor does not like being in melee, and *grace* is an amazing spell for helping with that. Be careful about swift/immediate actions. *Borrow fortune*, *grace*, and planar haze are all fighting for his swift/immediate action, so you can only use one of them per turn.

**Lastly, a note about hard mode.** In both tiers, hard mode adds an allip to the encounter, which puts the encounter at two babble auras. You need to keep track of each babble aura separately. The easiest way to do this is to create a table on a piece of scrap paper to keep track of which PCs have saved against which allip.This is a very hard thing to keep track of in your head, and between two different babbles and a possible *confusion*, it's enough that you shouldn't feel bad needing to write it all down.

### A8. The Control room

#### The Shemhazian in the Room

 The Ollysta and the Demon sidebar does a wonderful job of scripting what happens in the encounter if the PCs don't interfere, but it is likely that PCs will interfere. PCs might provide healing, buff Ollysta, or try to attack the shemhazian. Make adjustments that are reasonable and reward the PCs for providing help to the crusaders - especially if the PC is a member of the Silver Crusade faction. Some good things to keep in mind when making reasonable adjustments:
* The shemhazian should only be attacking the PCs if they prove that they are more of a threat to a demon that a couple of high level paladins. This is not easy, and besides the occasional attack of opportunity and the general hazard that the aura is, this should only be saved for PCs who manage to do significant damage to the shemhazian.
* Keep track of the damage that is dealt to the NPCs - all the better to show the effect that the PCs' healing is having on them. According to the numbers in the sidebar, Ollysta has 80 hit points and the crusaders have 40 hit points each.
* The scenario specifically allows for reducing damage dealt to the crusaders based off the PCs contributions to the combat. Don't be afraid to use this.
* In general, try to adjudicate things so that if the PCs take an active role in helping out the crusaders, it either doesn't change the clock or stalls it a round. The clock is already pretty rough, so there is no reason to make it go faster.

#### Solving the Puzzle Combat

This isn't really a slugfest like many other fights. This is a race to activate the weapon with as many charges as possible as soon as possible. Between Ghalcor warning them, a CR 16 breaking through the wall, and Ollysta yellling at them as she speeds in, it's usually enough to hint to the PCs about what is happening. In order to activate the weapon, the PCs need to accomplish the following steps:

**First, they need to make it up to the control panel with the Sacred Prisms.** Getting up to a platform 20 ft. up on the wall is not the hardest challenge for 5th to 9th level characters, but it's not trivial. There's three main ways that they could get up to the platform. They could go up the stairs, they could climb, or they could use magic.

* Going up the stairs is the most straightforward route. The stairs are about 100 feet long and they only go up by 20 ft., so they aren't even difficult terrain. There are a couple issues. The first is that there is an abrikandilu demon who is physically blocking the stairs. The PCs don't necessarily need to destroy it, but they need to get past it somehow. The shemhazian also destroys a 5ft. section of steps which require jumping, and the shemhazian physically threatens the upper half of the steps, which means that PCs are provoking a nasty AoO when the move across.

* They can try to climb up to the platform without going around the room. Either they can just try to scale the walls or they can throw a rope up to help them. Whichever they do, unless they have a climb speed they will be moving at one quarter of their normal move speed (or half as a full-round action). They can choose to move at half speed with one move action by taking a -5 penalty to the check to accelerated climb.
  * *Scale the walls* - The Climb DC of the walls isn't mentioned anywhere, but if you treat them as superior masonry then the Climb DC is 25.
  * *Use a rope* - First they need to get the rope hanging down. If they use a grappling hook then they need to hit an AC 5 with a -2 penalty because of the range increment. They should be able to catch the grappling hook on the floor easily since the stairs and platform are described as being made of metal mesh. Climbing a regular rope is DC 15, or DC 5 if they put the rope in the square adjacent to the wall. Climbing a knotted rope is DC 5, or DC 0 if the rope is adjacent to the wall.
  * *Use magic*s - There's a couple of spells that can help here. *Spider climb* helps, but it isn't automatic. It gives a +8 bonus to climb checks and allows the user to take 10 in combat, but they still need to make the DC 25 for the wall. *Fly* will easily get one person up there, but if they want more they either need to cast the spell multiple times or ferry people upwards. *Dimension door* can only get 2 people unless they are 9th level, which may be enough to get all the prisms up if the PCs have been concentrating them on a couple people.

**Next, they need to deal with the threats to the machine.** In both tiers, there's an abrikandilu on top of the platform smashing the machine. Every round the demon smashes the machine, making it require 1 more charge to activate. Technically they don't have to deal with the abrikandilu, but those charges can really pile up if the PCs aren't careful. The shemhazian's gaze will also affect all the PCs who are on the platform since every square on the platform is within 30 feet of the demon - unless they have something that can block line of sight with the demon, means that they need to be dealing with the gaze every turn. Note that unlike some other gazes, a creature does not become immune to the gaze for 24 hours after one successful save, so it should be coming up constantly.

**Next, they need to actually activate the machine.** Activating the machine takes a couple steps.
* **Slot the prisms into the device.** Slotting a prism into a slot is a move action, or a standard action if they are blind. There are a total of four slots on the weapon.
* **Arm the weapon.** Arming the weapon is a full round action, or two full-round actions if they are blind. The character who arms the weapon can make a DC 15 Intelligence check or a DC 20 Use Magic Device check to treat the weapon as if it had 1 more charge, plus one more charge for every 5 they beat the DC by.
* **Fire the weapon.** Turning a dial to fire the weapon is a standard action, or a full-round action if they are blind. The two dials need to be turned at the same time, which means that if two different people are trying to turn the dial, then one has to ready an action for the other one. This can cause a problem if both people are closing their eyes. If one person has 10-foot reach, then they can turn both dials at once as a standard action.

#### Sundering

The abrikandilus' main strategy is to sunder items, but since that's not a typical PFS strategy, it's worth discussing some of the finder points about sundering.

First, it's worth having access to [this sunder table](http://paizo.com/pathfinderRPG/prd/coreRulebook/additionalRules.html#breaking-items) during the game. Very few players are aware of their weapon's hardness and hit points during the game, which means that you're most likely going to have to calculate it on the fly. Keep in mind that some weapons are entirely made of metal, while some are made of metal and wood, and if it's made of both of them, the demons can [go for the weak spot in the weapon](http://paizo.com/paizo/faq/v5748nruor1fm#v5748eaic9rb7). Armor is much easier than using the table - it's just hardness of 10 or 5 depending on the material, and hp equal to the armor bonus times 5. In both cases, increase the hardness by 2 and the hit points by 10 for each +1 enhancement bonus (but not for +1 equivalent abilities).

Sunder is [a combat maneuver that you do in place of a melee attack](http://paizo.com/paizo/faq/v5748nruor1fm#v5748eaic9pyv). This means that you can full-attack sunder, and other options that the abrikandilu would have that apply to attacks also apply to sunder attacks. This includes using Power Attack and Vital Strike on sunder attacks. In fact, you may have to use Power Attack on your sunder attacks in order to make the damage bonus meaningful.

At the high tier, the abrikandilus gain some new abilities. Greater Sunder allows you to assign damage that wasn't needed to destroy the object to the wielder. The abrikandilu gains a heavy pick, which allows the abrikandilu to make iterative attacks, but its destructive attacks ability no longer applies because it is no longer using its natural weapons. Lastly, the smasher rage power exists, which is a nice surprise for that person who is using a adamantine longsword.

Lastly, you're going to have to become familiar with the [broken condition](http://paizo.com/pathfinderRPG/prd/coreRulebook/glossary.html#broken). The two most important to remember are weapons and armor. Weapons get a -2 to hit and damage and lose any expanded crit range. Armor halves its AC bonus and doubles its ACP against skills.

#### Firing the Weapon

It is really important to remember that the caster level is ***halved against neutral creatures***.

No seriously, this is not supposed to save or die every neutral creature who participates in this adventure.

That being said, it is supposed to be a threat to anyone with an evil aura or items with an evil aura. Characters with an evil aura are mainly going to be neutral clerics of evil deities and PCs who put on an item that came with an alignment shift during that scenario. Items with an evil aura are a bit more common. An attended magic item has a Will save of 2 + 1/2 the item's caster level or the Will save of the person holding it, whichever is higher. Unless the character has an absymal Will save, theirs will usually be higher than the item's save.

{% include note.html content="At the time when this came out, the Season 4 Lissala arc had just finished, and there were a bunch of PCs who were running around with a bunch of [evil] items. While this is a slightly lower tier than that arc, it was definitely possible to have PCs who had played in that arc who gained a bunch of evil items and then played in this scenario. Whether or not this was written to specifically target the items or as a reasonable consequence of releasing a super-powered *holy word*, pay special attention to if anyone has those items when playing in the high tier." %}

{% include note.html content="Some words about [*infernal healing*](http://archivesofnethys.com/SpellDisplay.aspx?ItemName=Infernal%20Healing) - the spell only says that the person under the effects of *infernal healing* detects as evil, not that they are treated as evil for the purpose of effects that care about alignment. In a home game, it would be perfectly reasonable to rule that the holy word would affect someone under *infernal healing*, but that's going a little too far off the written text for PFS." %}

## Known Issues

* The map doesn't mark the trigger area for the traps in A1. The trigger area should be the 10 ft. by 10 ft. area in the very middle of the hallway, [according to John Compton](http://paizo.com/threads/rzs2qmss?513-Weapon-in-the-Rift-GM-Discussion-Spoilers#2).
* The answer to the puzzle is wrong. It is listed in the scenario as "6–7–9–Blank, 4–8–Blank–Blank, 1–3–1–1, and 2–5–1–0", but the answer should actually be "6–9–7–Blank, 4–8–Blank–Blank, 1–3–1–1, and 5–2–1–0".
* The DC for the Diplomacy check in A3 is supposed to be lower in the higher tier. The DC is based off of the celestial legionnaires' Charisma score, and their Charisma score is lower in the higher tier than the lower tier. According to John Compton, [this is okay](http://paizo.com/threads/rzs2qmss?513-Weapon-in-the-Rift-GM-Discussion-Spoilers#8).
* The low-tier abrikandilus have the line "rage power (1)" instead of choosing an actual rage power. Just ignore it.

{% include links.html %}
